.\"  SPDX-License-Identifier: GPL-3.0-or-later
.\"
.\"  Copyright (C) 2016, Western Digital.
.\"  (C) Copyright 2019 Tj <ubuntu@iam.tj>
.\"  Copyright (C) 2020, Western Digital Corporation or its affiliates.
.\"  Written by Damien Le Moal <damien.lemoal@wdc.com>
.\"
.TH dmzadm 8 "May 20 2020"
.SH NAME
dmzadm \- manage zoned block device format for use with the dm-zoned device
mapper target

.SH SYNOPSIS
.B dmzadm
.B \-h | \-\-help
.sp
.B dmzadm
.B \-\-version
.sp
.B dmzadm
.I operation
[
.I regular\-block\-device
]
.I zoned\-block\-device\-0
[
.I zoned\-block\-device\-1
[...]
]
[
.B options
]

.SH DESCRIPTION

\fBdmzadm\fR is used to format, check and repair block devices used with the
dm-zoned device mapper. \fIzoned\-block\-device-0\fR specifies the device node
of the zoned block device to use (e.g. \fI/dev/sdX\fR).

\fIregular\-block\-device\fR is an optional device node corresponding to a
regular block device to be used together with the zoned block device to store
metadata and to act as the conventional zone storage space for the zoned
device.

When \fIregular\-block\-device\fR is used, more than one zoned block device can
be specified (\fIzoned\-block\-device\-1\fR etc). If multiple zoned block devices
are specified, all devices must have the same zone size.

\fIoperation\fR specifies the action to be taken on the device.

\fBdmzadm\fR returns 0 on success and 1 on failure.

.SH OPERATIONS

dmzadm defines the following operations.

.TP
.B \-h, \-\-help
Print a short usage description of dmzadm.

.TP
.B --version
Print the current version number and exit dmzadm.

.TP
.B \-\-format
Write to the zoned block device(s) and optional regular block device dm-zoned
metadata, whiping clean all data that was stored on the device(s).

.TP
.B \-\-check
Check the device(s) metadata consistency. No repair action is taken.
Metadata corruptions are not corrected with this operation. For repairing
incorrect metadata, the \fB\-\-repair\fR operation must be used.

.TP
.B \-\-repair
Check the consistency of the device(s) metadata and try to repair any error
detected.

.TP
.B \-\-relabel
Change the label (DM device name) of a formatted dm-zoned device.

.TP
.B \-\-start
Load the metadata information from the block device(s) and activate the
dm-zoned device.

.TP
.B \-\-stop
Deactivate the dm-zoned device associated with the block device(s).

.SH COMMON OPTIONS

The following options can be used with all operations.

.TP
.B \-\-verbose
Verbose output detailing actions taken.

.TP
.B \-\-vverbose
Very detailed output of actions taken.

.SH FORMAT OPERATION OPTIONS

The following options can be used when the \fB\-\-format\fR operation
is specified.

.TP
.B \-\-seq=\fInum\fR
Specify the number of sequential zones to be reserved for reclaim
(default: 16 per zoned block device).

.TP
.B \-\-label=\fIstr\fR
Define the label of the device-mapper device. If not specified, the label
defaults to \fIdmz\-serial\fR, where \fIserial\fR is the serial number of the
block device storing the metadata (the first block device specified). If the
serial number for the metadata block device is not available, the label
defaults to \fIdmz\-bdevname\fR where \fIbdevname\fR is the name of the
metadata block device.

.SH RELABEL OPERATION OPTIONS

The following options can be used when the \fB\-\-relabel\fR operation
is specified.

.TP
.B \-\-label=\fIstr\fR
Define the new label of the device-mapper device. If not specified, the new
label defaults to \fIdmz\-serial\fR, where \fIserial\fR is the serial number
of the block device storing the metadata (the first block device specified).
If the serial number for the metadata block device is not available, the label
defaults to \fIdmz\-bdevname\fR where \fIbdevname\fR is the name of the
metadata block device.

.SH AUTHORS
This version of \fBdmzadm\fR was written by Damien Le Moal
<damien.lemoal@wdc.com> and Albert H. Chen <albert.chen@wdc.com> with
contributions from Hannes Reinecke <hare@suse.de>.

.SH COPYRIGHT
GNU General Public Licence version 3 or later
.PP
 (c) 2016-2020 Western Digital Corportation and its affiliates
.PP
Manual written by Damien Le Moal <damien.lemoal@wdc.com and by
Tj <ubuntu@iam.tj> for Debian and Ubuntu.

.SH AVAILABILITY
.B dmzadm
is available from the dm-zoned-tools project hosted on github at
https://github.com/westerndigitalcorporation/dm-zoned-tools

.SH SEE ALSO
.BR dmsetup (8)
